---
layout: chapter
name: prospecting-the-region
title: "Prospecting the region"
chap: introduction
description: The members of the Umgungundlovu community pride themselves on a long history of occupying, owning and using their land. Situated in Bizana, Eastern Cape, the community has a history in the region that is over 200 years old.
---

The members of the Umgungundlovu community pride themselves on a long history of occupying, owning and using their land.

During the 1800s the Zulu Kingdom often prevented other communities from practicing their customs and traditions. The forebears of the Umgungundlovu community emigrated from Zululand to preserve the Mpondo culture.

Therefore the Umgungundlovu community, situated in Bizana, Eastern Cape, has a history in the region that is over 200 years old.

In 2002, a new threat to the Umgungundlovu community appeared on the horizon:
An Australian mining company was granted <a class="info-link" data-toggle="collapse" href="#prospecting-rights" aria-expanded="false" aria-controls="prospecting-rights"><i class="fa fa-info-circle" aria-hidden="true"></i> prospecting rights</a> which would allow them to freely move across this land to determine if there are mineral deposits worth exploiting. The prospecting rights would last for five years and included a strip of coastline more than 21 kilometers long and extending, at some points, almost two kilometers inland.

<div class="edu-segment collapse" id="prospecting-rights">
	<p class="edu-title">What are prospecting mining rights?</p>

	<p>The Minerals and Petroleum Resources Development Act 28 of 2002 (as amended) (MPRDA), describes prospecting rights as follows:</p>

	<p>“prospecting” means intentionally searching for any mineral by means of any method —</p>
	<ul>
		<li>which disturbs the surface or subsurface of the earth, including any portion of the earth that is under the sea or under other water; or</li>
		<li> in or on any residue stockpile or residue deposit, in order to establish the existence of any mineral and to determine the extent and economic value thereof; or</li>
		<li>in the sea or other water on land.</li>
	</ul>
	<p>The holder of a prospecting right has wide-ranging rights to do what they want on the land to which the rights have been granted, whether they own or lease the land or not.</p>

	<p>In terms of section five of the MPRDA they may:</p>
		<ul>
			<li>enter the land to which such right relates together with his or her employees, and bring onto that land any plant, machinery or equipment and build, construct or lay down any surface, underground or under sea infrastructure which may be required for the purpose of prospecting;</li>
			<li>remove and dispose of any such mineral found during the course of prospecting, mining, exploration or production, as the case may be;</li>
			<li>subject to the National Water Act, use water from any natural spring, lake, river or stream, situated on, or flowing through, such land or from any excavation previously made and used for prospecting purposes, or sink a well or borehole required for use relating to prospecting on such land; and carry out any other activity incidental to prospecting which activity does not contravene the provisions of this Act.</li>
		</ul>
	<p>At the same time, mining companies must submit an application for an environmental authorisation in terms of the National Environmental Management Act to the Minister.</p>
	<p>Application for a prospecting right (s 16 of the MPRDA) is submitted to the Regional Manager of the Department of Minerals. The application must be submitted at the same time as an application for an environmental authorization.</p>
	<p>A prospecting right lasts for a maximum of 5 years. Often, companies get the prospecting right before they are actually ready to start working just to ensure that no-one else gets it. That way, a community may not know anything for years. It is possible to apply for the renewal of a prospecting right after 5 years.</p>
</div>

The Australian mining company, Mineral Commodities Ltd (MRC), owner of the South African subsidiary Transworld Energy and Mineral Resources SA (Pty) Ltd (TEM), intended to extract the heavy minerals from the sands in this area. TEM estimated that five per cent of the sand is made up of valuable heavy minerals such as titanium.

Mining threatens the livelihood of the Umgungundlovu community whose social structure is invested in the land. The land is fertile for farming and offers the community grazing for their livestock as well as natural resources for traditional harvesting. The Umgungundlovu community also assigns cultural value to the land in which “umzi” (a residential plot) symbolises social maturity and social dignity. It is more than just a place in which to live.

Furthermore, the prospective region for mining forms part of South Africa’s natural heritage and is known as the Pondoland Centre of Endemism, which is home to 200 different plants that are not found anywhere else in the world.

At this crucial point, in a battle that has spanned 15 years to date, the community of Umgungundlovu remain unaware of TEM’s plans for the region. Thus the Umgungundlovu community was unable to take legal action against TEM’s search for heavy minerals on their lands.