---
layout: chapter
name: prospecting
title: "Prospecting the region: An introduction"
image: something.jpg
---
# Event
2002: Transworld Energy and Mineral Resources SA (Pty) Ltd (‘TEM’) is granted prospecting rights to mine the heavy minerals in the sand.

- Prospecting rights application
  - Definition, incl.
    - What is it, what does it allow, for how long does it last and 
  - Processes
    - How does a community find out about prospecting rights in the region
  - Resources

## Resource

The members of the Umgungundlovu community pride themselves on the long history of occupying, owning and using their land.

During the 1800s it was common practice for the Zulu Kingdom to prevent other communities from practicing their customs and traditions. The forebears of the Umgungundlovu community emigrated from Zululand to preserve the Mpondo culture. 

Therefore the Umgungundlovu community, situated in Bizana, Eastern Cape, has a history in the region that is over 200 years old.

In 2002, a new threat to the Umgungundlovu community appeared on the horizon.

An Australian mining company was granted prospecting rights which would allow them to freely move across this land to determine if there are mineral deposits worth exploiting. The prospecting rights would last for five years and included a strip of coastline more than 21 kilometers long and extending, at some points, almost two kilometers inland.

The mining company, Transworld Energy and Mineral Resources SA (Pty) Ltd (TEM), intended to extract the heavy minerals from the sands in this area. TEM estimated that 5% of the sand is made up by valuable heavy minerals such as titanium.

[Prospecting rights segment]: this includes (1) a definition of what prospecting rights are, (2) what they allow mining companies to do over the duration of the grant, (3) how long does a mining company have prospecting rights over a region for, (4) how can a community find out whether a mining company has prospecting rights over their land and (5) where can communities look for extra information concerning the matter (resources).

[end]

Mining threatens the livelihood of the Umgungundlovu community whose social structure is invested in the land. The land is fertile for farming and offers the community grazing for their livestock as well as natural resources for traditional harvesting. The Umgungundlovu community also assigns cultural value to the land in which “umzi” (a residential plot) symbolises social maturity and social dignity. Thus, it is more than just a place of living.

Furthermore, the prospective region for mining forms part of South Africa’s natural heritage and is known as the Pondoland Centre of Endemism, which is home to 200 different plants that are found nowhere else in the world.

At this crucial point, in a battle that would span 15 years to date, the community of Umgungundlovu remain unaware of TEM’s plans for the region. Thus the Umgungundlovu community was unable to take legal action against TEM’s search for heavy minerals on their lands.

[Resources]: include relevant resources.

# Action 

Nothing noted in the memo between 2002 (prospecting rights) and 2007 (application for mining rights).

Are there things we could suggest communities could look out for?

Resources

# Result