---
layout: chapter
name: rights-to-mine
title: "The Rights to Mine"
chap: Chapter One
description: In early 2007, on the last Tuesday of March, Transworld Energy and Minerals lodged a mining rights application requesting the right to mine the land upon which the Umgungundlovu community resides.
---

In early 2007, on the last Tuesday of March, TEM lodged a mining rights application requesting the right to mine the land upon which the Umgungundlovu community resides.

TEM’s application for mining rights was accompanied by an <a class="info-link" data-toggle="collapse" href="#eia" aria-expanded="false" aria-controls="eia"><i class="fa fa-info-circle" aria-hidden="true"></i> Environmental Assessment Report</a> (EIA) report. The submission of an EIA report with a mining application is a requirement of the Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Act (MPRDA).

<div class="edu-segment collapse" id="eia">
	<p class="edu-title">Environmental Assessment Report</p>
	
	<p>The EIA has 2 components: a scoping report and an Impact assessment. The scoping report must:</p>
	<ol type="a">
		<li>Describe the methodology applied to conduct scoping;</li>
		<li>Describe the existing status of the environment prior to the mining operation;</li>
		<li>Identify and describe the anticipated environmental, social and cultural impacts, including the cumulative effects, where applicable;</li>
		<li>Identify and describe reasonable land use or development alternatives to the proposed operation, alternative means of carrying out the proposed operation and the consequences of not proceeding with the proposed operation;</li>
		<li>Describe the most appropriate procedure to plan and develop the proposed mining operation;</li>
		<li>Describe the process of engagement of identified interested and affected persons, including their views and concerns; and</li>
		<li>Describe the nature and extent of further investigations required in the environmental impact assessment report.</li>
	</ol>

	<p>There is first a draft scoping report – community can insist on giving the opportunity to comment. There is sometimes a scoping meeting with affected parties but it is not a requirement.</p>

	<p>Then they proceed to a status quo report and a draft EIA – for comments.</p>
	<p>Then finalise the EIA.</p>

</div>

The area under which the Umgungundlovu community falls was initially zoned for tourism and conservation. This region has habitats such as wetlands, dune forests and coastal grasslands that add value to the natural economy. It also includes the Pondoland Marine Protected Area, which has rivers, estuaries and reefs that represent unspoilt environments for aquatic life as well as a source of fresh water for the community.

> Are you aware if any portion of your land has been declared a protected area or has significant conservation value?

Mining companies usually include measures to rehabilitate the land once mining stops. After mining, according to TEM’s plan, this prime conservation land will be rezoned for agriculture.

The community, however, sees tourism as a more favourable solution in their region because they can maintain their access to this land, their livelihood, quality of living and traditions alongside touristic developments.

Once the Umgungundlovu community had been made aware of TEM’s application for mining rights to their land, the Amadiba traditional community, of which the Umgungundlovu community is a part of, formed the <a class="info-link" data-toggle="collapse" href="#amadiba" aria-expanded="false" aria-controls="prospecting-rights"><i class="fa fa-info-circle" aria-hidden="true"></i> Amadiba Crisis Committee (ACC)</a>. The committee, whose aim would be to work together to protect the region from the threat of mining, represented persons in five villages in the greater Amadiba region.

<div class="edu-segment collapse" id="amadiba">
	<p class="edu-title">The Amadiba Crisis Committee</p>

	<p>The Amadiba Crisis Committee in fact consists of all 200 affected community members. They do not have a constitution, as they don’t want to have legal personality and be sued. However, the spokespersons of the committee (who are in effect the leaders) are elected.</p>
	 
	<p>The critical aspect of the committee’s success is that they have community meetings every week and these are recorded. These meetings overlap with the headwoman’s meeting in their area as they make common cause with her. That is often not the case in many areas which complicates matters.</p>
	 
	<h4>How to form a crisis committee:</h4>
	<p>Communities are advised to reach out to existing community networks. I will send a table with this information.</p>
</div>

The ACC approached the Legal Resources Centre (LRC) for representation regarding the mining threat. The ACC and the LRC then worked together and acted upon their right to submit a comment on the EIA report. Comments on EIA reports are accepted within 30 days of publication of advertisements in newspapers.

While it took them nearly two weeks to gain access to the EIA, when it finally became available on the website, their submission of a comment became the first legal action the Umgungundlovu community, along with neighbouring villages, took against TEM.


<h4>Where can your community go to find legal representation?</h4>

The following list of organisations can be contacted for specialist guidance and assistance:

<div>
	<ul>
		<li><a href="http://lrc.org.za/lrcarchive/" target="_blank">Legal Resources Centre</a></li>
		<li><a href="http://www.lhr.org.za/" target="_blank">Lawyers for Human Rights</a></li>
		<li><a href="http://cer.org.za/" target="_blank">Centre for Environmental Rights</a></li>
		<li><a href="https://www.wits.ac.za/cals/" target="_blank">Centre for Applied Legal Studies</a></li>
	</ul>
</div>


## Resources

- [List of Civil Society Organisations (CSOs) involved in extractive industries in South Africa](/resources/CSOs-community-networks.pdf)