---
layout: chapter
name: granting-conditional-mining-rights
title: "The granting of conditional mining rights"
chap: Chapter Two
description: TEM was awarded conditional mining rights in August 2008. It allowed them to begin mining operations in the most important of the five blocks involved, the Kwanyana block.
---
TEM had been awarded <a class="info-link" data-toggle="collapse" href="#conditional-rights" aria-expanded="false" aria-controls="conditional-rights"><i class="fa fa-info-circle" aria-hidden="true"></i> conditional mining rights</a> by August of 2008. The conditional rights allowed TEM to begin mining operations in the most important of the five blocks involved, the Kwanyana block.

<div class="edu-segment collapse" id="conditional-rights">
	<p class="edu-title">What are conditional mining rights?</p>

	<p>When a mining company is granted ‘conditional’ mining rights, it means that mining rights to the land has been granted to that company, although solely on a ‘conditional’ basis.</p>

	<p>The conditions that a mining company has to meet to begin mining activity on the land are:</p>
	<ul>
		<li>That the mining company is granted mining rights to the land</li>
		<li>Has a fully approved Environmental Impact Assessment report (EIA)</li>
		<li>Has sent out a letter of notice to landowners and/or individuals currently occupying the land that they will enter the land within 30 days</li>
	</ul>
 
	<p>The time that it takes to meet, review and approve each of these conditions are different and the granting of the mining right takes this into consideration. That is why a mining company can hold their mining rights ‘conditionally’ prior to the final approval of the EIA, as this process takes the longest of them all.</p>
 
	<p>The Department of Mineral Resources (DMR) does not follow the belief that communities need to see the mining right. As a result, in order to view it communities often turn to other legal processes to gain access to these documents - such as the Promotion of Access to Information Act (PAIA) or the court system.</p>
 
	<p><strong>How can communities and legal representatives monitor the status of the conditional mining right?</strong> The status of a conditional mining right at this stage can only be monitored through the ongoing processing and approval of the EIA.</p>
</div>

Mining applications divide the land into smaller areas or “blocks”. These blocks allow mining companies to strategize their mining activities for the duration of their contract.

TEM found that the Kwanyana block had the richest reserves of titanium in the area. This made the Kwanyana block a top priority over all other blocks for mining activity.

The granting of the conditional mining rights pose an immediate threat to the Xolobeni village which is the closest village, within the Umgungundlovu community, to the Kwanyana block. This would involve the displacement of the Xolobeni villagers which directly affects their customary law.

> How and where can your community find out if a mining company has been granted prospecting, conditional, or mining rights to your land?

The customary law of the Umgungundlovu community is deeply rooted in the shared history, culture and interests of the community. The community’s customary law emphasises the responsibility of maintaining a lifestyle that values natural resources such as land. Furthermore, the respect given to ancestral gravesites would cause displaced villagers to experience the degeneration of umzi institutions.

While the Xolobeni village does not fall within the Kwanyana block, this land forms part of communal land that is utilised by the greater Umgungundlovu community, the use of which is governed by their customary law.

The ACC only became aware of the granting of a conditional mining rights license to TEM once it was listed on the Australian Stock Exchange - almost three weeks after the right was granted.

On behalf of the ACC, the LRC took the second legal action against the mining company by launching an  <a class="info-link" data-toggle="collapse" href="#internal-appeal" aria-expanded="false" aria-controls="internal-appeal"><i class="fa fa-info-circle" aria-hidden="true"></i> internal appeal</a> against the awarding of the license.

<div class="edu-segment collapse" id="internal-appeal">
	<p class="edu-title">What is an Internal Appeal?</p>

	<p>Section 96 of the Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Act (MPRDA) allows the right of appeal to any person or party who is or could be affected by, for example, a decision to accept or reject a prospecting right or mining right application or to grant or refuse a mining or prospecting right application.</p>
 
	<p>Section 96 of the MPRDA details the internal appeal process and access to courts as follows:</p>

	<p>1. Any person whose rights or legitimate expectations have been materially and adversely affected or who is aggrieved by any administrative decision in terms of this Act may appeal within 30 days becoming aware of such administrative decision in the prescribed manner to —</p>
	<ul>
		<li>the Director-General, if it is an administrative decision by a Regional Manager or any officer to whom the power has been delegated or a duty has been assigned by or under this Act;</li>
		<li>the Minister, if it is an administrative decision that was taken by the Director-General or the designated agency.</li>
	</ul>

	<p>2. An appeal in terms of subsection (1) does not suspend the administrative decision, unless it is suspended by the Director-General or the Minister, as the case may be.</p>
	<ul>
		<li>Any subsequent application in terms of this Act must be suspended pending the finalisation of the appeal referred to in paragraph (a).</li>
	</ul>
	<p>When writing the argument for your appeal, it is very important to indicate clearly which activities must be suspended pending the results of the appeal. The appeal process can take years to conclude and without a request for the suspension of activities mining companies are free to proceed with mining while the appeal is being processed.</p>

	<p>3.  No person may apply to the court for the review of an administrative decision contemplated in subsection (1) until that person has exhausted his or her remedies in terms of that subsection.</p>

	<p>4. Sections 6, 7 (1) and 8 of the Promotion of Administrative Justice Act, 2000 (Act No. 3 of 2000), apply to any court proceedings contemplated in this section.</p>

	<p><strong>How can you track the results of the internal appeal?</strong> Only through corresponding with Department. This can become very difficult.</p>

</div>

## Resources
- [CSO and community networks - Description of work in extractives](/resources/CSOs-community-networks.pdf)