---
layout: chapter
name: consulting-community
title: "Consulting the community"
chap: Chapter Three
description: In September 2008, the Minister of Minerals and Energy wrote to the LRC in response to the internal appeal. The Minister stated that the conditional mining rights would not come into effect until a representative from the Department of Minerals and Energy had held public hearings and consulted with the traditional leaders of the greater Amadiba community.
---
By the following month, September 2008, the Minister of Minerals and Energy wrote to the LRC in response to the internal appeal. The Minister stated that the conditional mining rights would not come into effect until a representative from the Department of Minerals and Energy (DME) had held public hearings and consulted with the traditional leaders of the greater Amadiba community.

The greater Amadiba community is one of the most underdeveloped areas in South Africa and lacks basic municipal services such as power lines and plumbing. The mine has thus caused a division in the community as some members whose rights would not be directly affected hoped that it would bring jobs and development. 

This deep split in the community has led to a pattern of violence in which community activists working to protect the cultural and environmental heritage are being targeted.

> Has your community been consulted?

In February 2011, almost three years after the announcement of the suspension of TEM’s conditional mining rights, the Minister appointed a task team to consult the community. After consultation processes, the DME is obligated to issue a decision. The clock starts ticking once the application is accepted. It should be approved within 197 days, although this time frame is rarely met by the DME. The delayed action of the DME to issue a decision led the ACC to submit a complaint to the Public Protector.

A decision was then issued by the DME in June 2011 in which TEM’s conditional mining rights was suspended on the basis of certain environmental requirements remaining outstanding.

<div class="edu-segment">
<p class="edu-title">What is a Complaint?</p>

This includes (1) a definition of what a complaint is, (2) how, where and to whom a complaint is submitted, (3) requirements and criteria for submitting a complaint, (4) how to obtain the documentation upon which your complaint is based, (5) how and where to track results of your complaint, and (6) where can communities look for extra information concerning this matter (resources).
</div>

Although the DME eventually held a public hearing with the greater Amadiba community, it is the DME’s obligation / responsibility to formally consult the community prior to issuing any rights related to mining activities.

<div class="edu-segment">
<p class="edu-title">What is a public hearing?</p>

This includes (1) a definition of what a departmental ?? consultation is, (2) how, where and to whom a do you request consultation from, (3) requirements and criteria for requesting a consultation, and (4) where can communities look for extra information concerning this matter (resources).
</div>

<a class="info-link" data-toggle="collapse" href="#mprda-section-96" aria-expanded="false" aria-controls="conditional-rights"><i class="fa fa-info-circle" aria-hidden="true"></i> MPRDA section 96</a>

<div class="edu-segment collapse" id="mprda-section-96">
	<div class="edu-title">MPRDA section 96</div>
	Internal appeal process and access to courts.—
	<ol>
		<li>Any person whose rights or legitimate expectations have been materially and adversely affected or who is aggrieved by any administrative decision (So ANY decision that an official takes and that will affect your rights (for example I will lose access to my shared grazing land) can be challenged within 30 days. So a short time!) in terms of this Act may appeal within 30 days becoming aware of such administrative decision in the prescribed manner to—</li>
		<ul>
			<li>the Director-General, if it is an administrative decision by a Regional Manager or any officer to whom the power has been delegated or a duty has been assigned by or under this Act;</li>
			<li>the Minister, if it is an administrative decision that was taken by the Director-General or the designated agency.</li>
		</ul>
		<li>(a) An appeal in terms of subsection (1) does not suspend the administrative decision, unless it is suspended by the Director-General or the Minister, as the case may be.<br>
		(b) Any subsequent application in terms of this Act must be suspended pending the finalisation of the appeal referred to in paragraph (a).</li>
		<li>No person may apply to the court for the review of an administrative decision contemplated in subsection (1) until that person has exhausted his or her remedies in terms of that subsection.</li>
		<li>Sections 6, 7 (1) and 8 of the Promotion of Administrative Justice Act, 2000 (Act No. 3 of 2000), apply to any court proceedings contemplated in this section.</li>
	</ol> 
	 
	<ul>
		<li>The community must make out an argument in their appeal to say why activities must be suspended pending the appeal. Very important.</li>
		<li>I did an internal appeal in 2010. In 2017, we received notification that we were successful. However, mining had not been suspended so the mining was finished by the time we won!</li>
		<li>How can you track the results of your appeal?</li>
		<li>Only through corresponding with Department. Very frustrating and difficult.</li>
	</ul>

	<div><a class="close-link" data-toggle="collapse" href="#mprda-section-96" aria-expanded="false" aria-controls="mprda-section-96"><i class="fa fa-times-circle" aria-hidden="true"></i> Close</a></div>
</div>

Before going to the public protector, it is advisable to write to the relevant officials responsible for the prejudice – in this case perhaps the Regional Manager of DMR. Even if you think nothing will happen, it is very important for a community to create a paper trail – so keep all letters, keep a diary of interactions with government or anyone relevant. That is how one builds a case.

You should also write to the national and provincial legislatures.
When one eventually writes to the Public Protector showing all the attempts made at resolving the issue, , your case will be so much stronger.

One should go to the Public Protector for issues of a systemic nature, so ongoing prejudice against the community. It would not be advisable to complain to the PP about not being consulted on a mining right that will affect you. For that one must do an internal appeal and then go to court. The PP is not effective in providing immediate remedies like stopping a mining rights application. But it can be effective in addressing an issue such as a Department that has ignored the community/not responded to an application for years.

### Requirements for a letter of complaint

A letter of complaint to the PP should contain:
- Nature of the complaint
- Background and history of the complaint
- Reasons why you feel the complaint should be investigated by the Public Protector
- Steps you have taken to solve the problem yourself (if applicable). You should mention names of the officials you have been dealing with, on what dates, and what was said.- 
- Copies of any correspondence between you and the officials should be attached to your letter.- 
- A telephone number where you can be reached, if you have one. 
- In some instances the Public Protector may require a statement under oath before investigating.

If you are unsure whether your problem is something the Public Protector will investigate, or if you cannot write, you can phone the Public Protector's office. There are trained professional staff members who will listen to a complaint, big or small, and conduct investigations. In some cases the staff can help people to find quick solutions to their problems. The staff can also tell you where to complain if the Public Protector cannot help you.

There is a big distinction between CONSULTATION and CONSENT. When the law only requires consultation, then the community doesn’t really have any power to change what is presented to them.
That is why we believe it is important for the community to assert its property rights to the land (in terms of customary law – see next chapter or the Interim Protection of Informal Land Rights (IPILRA) as described above) which provides a basis to claim the right to provide or withhold consent. If you can say no to something, then you have some bargaining power. If not, you have no power.

So questions about consultation:
- Did it happen?
- With who?
- What information was provided?
- If there are people with rights in terms of the IPILRA, then they must insist on the principles of Free, Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC).

FPIC: Free, Prior, Informed Consent refers both to a substantive right under international-, statute- and customary law as well as a process designed to ensure satisfactory development outcomes. The right to FPIC places the development decision in the hands of the community. To realise this right, the community’s decision should be made free from any obligation, duty, force or coercion. Ideally, alternative development options should also be available to the community to ensure that the decision is based on real choice. Secondly, the community has the right to make the development choice prior to any similar decisions made by government, finance institutions or investors. In other words, the community’s right to FPIC is not realised if they are presented with a project as a fait accompli. Thirdly, the community must be able to make an informed decision. That means that they should be provided sufficient information to understand the nature and scope of the project, including its projected environmental, social, cultural and economic impacts. Such information should be objective and based on a principle of full disclosure. The community should be afforded enough time to digest and debate the information. Finally, consent means that the community’s decision may be to reject the proposed development. They can say no.

FPIC is then also described as a process precisely because the right to say no places the community in a position to negotiate. In other words, FPIC is not designed only to stop undesirable projects, but also to provide communities with better bargaining positions when they do consider allowing proposed developments on their land or resources.