---
layout: chapter
name: consulting-community
title: "Consulting the community"
chap: Chapter Three
image: something.jpg
description: Voluptate hic ipsa temporibus. Deserunt aperiam quasi et. Sit quibusdam animi expedita enim et. Voluptatem adipisci ducimus deleniti molestiae nihil odio. Quia maiores in officia. Est itaque quis et vitae. Quaerat nostrum suscipit voluptates voluptatem et consequatur ea.
---

By the following month, September 2008, the Minister of Minerals and Energy wrote to the LRC in response to the internal appeal. The Minister stated that the conditional mining rights would not come into effect until a representative from the Department of Minerals and Energy (DME) had held public hearings and consulted with the traditional leaders of the greater Amadiba community.

The greater Amadiba community is one of the most underdeveloped areas in South Africa and lacks basic municipal services such as power lines and plumbing. The mine has thus caused a division in the community as some members whose rights would not be directly affected hoped that it would bring jobs and development. 

This deep split in the community has led to a pattern of violence in which community activists working to protect the cultural and environmental heritage are being targeted.

> Has your community been consulted?

In February 2011, almost three years after the announcement of the suspension of TEM’s conditional mining rights, the Minister appointed a task team to consult the community. After consultation processes, the DME is obligated to issue a decision within x days. The delayed action of the DME to issue a decision led the ACC to submit a complaint to the Public Protector.

A decision was then issued by the DME in June 2011 in which TEM’s conditional mining rights was suspended on the basis of certain environmental requirements remaining outstanding.

<div class="edu-segment">
<p class="edu-title">What is a Complaint?</p>

This includes (1) a definition of what a complaint is, (2) how, where and to whom a complaint is submitted, (3) requirements and criteria for submitting a complaint, (4) how to obtain the documentation upon which your complaint is based, (5) how and where to track results of your complaint, and (6) where can communities look for extra information concerning this matter (resources).
</div>

Although the DME eventually held a public hearing with the greater Amadiba community, it is the DME’s obligation / responsibility to formally consult the community prior to issuing any rights related to mining activities.

<div class="edu-segment">
<p class="edu-title">What is a public hearing?</p>

This includes (1) a definition of what a departmental ?? consultation is, (2) how, where and to whom a do you request consultation from, (3) requirements and criteria for requesting a consultation, and (4) where can communities look for extra information concerning this matter (resources).
</div>
