---
layout: chapter
name: objection
title: "Objection"
chap: Chapter Four
description: In 2012, TEM applied for a prospecting mining rights license for the Kwanyana block. In response to this, the ACC and LRC filed an objection to TEM’s application as they believed that the company was trying to buy time to prevent other mining companies from being able to operate in the area.
---
A year later, in 2012, TEM applied for a prospecting mining rights license for the Kwanyana block. In response to this, the ACC and LRC filed an objection to TEM’s application as they believed that the company was trying to buy time to prevent other mining companies from being able to operate in the area.

<div class="edu-segment">
	<div class="edu-title">What is an objection?</div>

	<p>This includes (1) a definition of what an objection is, (2) how, where and to whom are objections submitted, (3) requirements and criteria for submitting an objection, (4) how and where to track results of your objection, and (5) where can communities look for extra information concerning this matter (resources).</p>
</div>

A committee under the Mineral and Mining Development Board instructed TEM to hold public participation meetings. Once again a year later, in 2013, various meetings were held, but this time between TEM and the greater Amadiba community. The result of these processes were that the prospecting mining rights license was never awarded to TEM.

TEM then approached one of the senior traditional leaders in the greater Amadiba community to be the director of Xolobeni Empowerment Company (Pty) Ltd (XolCo). XolCo, a local registered stakeholders trust, is a BEE company that holds 26% of the shares in the Xolobeni Sands mining project.

This was a strategic move by TEM to shift the perspective of the community to favour mining practices in the region.

Once more, violence escalated in the area. Reports of weapons circulating between pro-mining community members led to numerous alleged shootings and assaults within the community. The weapons used ranged from traditional poisons to bush knives and guns.

> *A prompt speaking to violence...

In response to this, in May 2015, the LRC and Richard Spoor Inc. (RSI) applied for an interdict against XolCo on behalf of the ACC. This legal action was to prevent further attacks and intimidation toward community members that opposed mining development. 

The interdict was then granted against the senior traditional leader heading XolCo and a number of pro-mining community members.

<div class="edu-segment">
	<div class="edu-title">What is an interdict?</div>

	<p>An interdict is what a person asks the court to grant when they can show that it is likely that someone will unlawfully violate their rights and they have no other way of stopping the violation. So, for example, a community has rights to their land. When they see a mining company driving up with bulldozers to their land while they do not have the mining right etc to do so, then community asks the court to protect their land rights through an interdict. So interdicts normally stops something from happening and is usually quite urgent.</p>

	<b>Who can file an interdict?</b>

	<p>Any person who can show that they have a ‘clear right’ that stands to be unlawfully violated by someone else’s actions.</p>
	 
	<p>Another example of interdicts often used is traditional leaders who interdict community members from holding meetings without the traditional leader being present. They interdict these meetings because they are arranged to discuss grievances with the traditional leader.</p>
	 
	<p>In Pilane v Pilane, the Constitutional Court held that there is no right of the traditional leader that is being violated when community members meet without him and to discuss him. Rather, the rights of the community to debate, associate and have political freedoms are far more important.</p>
	 
	<p>Despite that, these interdicts are still being granted by High Courts and Magistrate’s Courts in SA.</p>
</div>

By March 2015, TEM’s prospecting mining rights over other blocks at Xolobeni were due to expire. TEM then applied for mining rights over the entire area. The ACC and the LRC filed an objection in response to TEM’s new application for mining rights. This time around the objection took it one step further and targeted the application itself, not just social and environmental impacts associated with mining activities.

The LRC and RSI prepared a comprehensive objection based on both customary law and land law, referencing/summoning the Interim Protection of Informal Land Rights Act (IPILRA). The LRC and RSI also requested copies of TEM’s application documents which included the mining work programme and the Social and Labour Plan. This would allow the greater Amadiba community to understand realistic opportunities for employment and TEM’s vision for the relocation and/or compensation for displaced members of the community.

> Are you aware of your rights and what information you are entitled to?

When TEM and the Department of Mineral Resources refused to hand over the full set of application documents, the community took action by launching a court case. In terms of the Constitution and the Minerals and Petroleum Resources Development Act (MPRDA) the community requested immediate access to these documents so that they could prepare an objection to address all aspects of the application. The court case had two interesting features.

Firstly, the applicants included the community represented by the Inkosana and her councilors and each of the 120 odd adults directly affected. Secondly, the right of access to the MRA was claimed also on behalf of all communities who are faced with MRAs as a form of a class action, which is still ongoing.

As a result of this, TEM handed over redacted versions of the Mining Right Application and the community was able to file a comprehensive objection in terms of section 10 of the MPRDA.

<div class="edu-segment">
	<div class="edu-title">What is a class action law suit?</div>

	<p>This includes (1) a definition of what a class action suit it, (2) requirements and criteria, (3) where can communities look for extra information concerning this matter (resources).</p>
</div>