---
layout: chapter
name: moratorium
title: "The Moratorium"
chap: Chapter Five
description: On Tuesday 22 March 2016 the chair of the ACC was assassinated. This caused the Minister of Minerals and Energy to activate an 18-month moratorium on any mining applications for the area.
---
On Tuesday 22 March 2016 the chair of the ACC was assassinated. This caused the Minister of Minerals and Energy to activate an <a class="info-link" data-toggle="collapse" href="#moratorium" aria-expanded="false" aria-controls="moratorium"><i class="fa fa-info-circle" aria-hidden="true"></i> 18 month moratorium</a> on any mining applications for the area. In the announcement of the moratorium, the Minister stated the reason as being “having regard for the social and political climate at Xolobeni and reflecting on the significant social disintegration and highly volatile nature of the current situation in the area”.

<div class="edu-segment collapse" id="moratorium">
	<p class="edu-title">What is a moratorium?</p>

	<p>The Minister has the discretion to place a moratorium on the granting of any rights in terms of the Minerals Act. The Minister granted this moratorium at Xolobeni because of the violence that had ensued between pro- and anti-mining groups.</p>
 
	<p>A community can ask the Minister to use his power to announce a moratorium (and it would be good to refer to the precedent set in Xolobeni). But it is really within the discretion of the Minister and happens very rarely.</p>

	<a class="info-link" data-toggle="collapse" href="#moratorium" aria-expanded="false" aria-controls="moratorium">close</a>
</div>

The MRC-owned TEM was then re-assigned to Keysha Investments 178, a South African partner, to manage further progress. A strategic move on MRC’s part to distance the Australian interest by making it seem as an exclusively South African operation. This further contributed to the weariness of the greater Amadiba community that TEM and the government might be working together in isolating the community in its struggle.

To prevent further violence once the moratorium is lifted, the greater Amadiba community instructed the LRC and RSI to apply for a <a class="info-link" data-toggle="collapse" href="#declaratory-order" aria-expanded="false" aria-controls="declaratory-order"><i class="fa fa-info-circle" aria-hidden="true"></i> declaratory order</a> against TEM’s mining rights application in the High Court. Specifically, that TEM’s mining right’s application may not be granted or that mining may not commence unless (1) TEM has consent from all holders of rights in and to the land that will be affected, and (2) compensation, redress or alternative livelihoods for loss and damage have been agreed upon, determined by arbitration, or by a competent court.

<div class="edu-segment collapse" id="declaratory-order">
	<p class="edu-title">What is a declaratory order?</p>

	<p>This is when a community asks the Court to give an order declaring what their rights are. So the community tells the court that they can prove that they have, for example, customary ownership of their land and that they have the right to FPIC.</p>
 
	<p>If you want to rely on the customary law rights of the community, you will ideally need community and academic experts. So, some elders and others steeped in the history of the community who can testify to the customary system of land rights and governance in your community. Then, you may also get an academic expert to confirm what you say. See the Xolobeni application supported by the affidavit of Prof Beinart.</p>
</div>

Again, the application for a declaratory order was in the form of a class action and dealt with the community’s history. This included its underdevelopment, its customary law and decision making processes, the applicable customary law and statute law dealing with land transactions, as well as planning and environmental management.

This application was supported by expert reports that showed that the community was aware of its own development potential and the implications of refusing mining development.

> Does your community follow a system of customary law?

Matters, however, will only become further complicated, as a proposed law i.e. the Traditional and Khoi-San Leadership Bill, seeks to remove the land rights from communities living on communal land. This proposed law works against the structure of customary law by giving authority to traditional leadership to make decisions to trade communal land on behalf of the entire community.

This disrespects the consensual core of customary law in which a community engages in extensive consultation prior to decision-making.

## Resources

- [Customary law and the protection of community rights to resources](/resources/customary-law.pdf)