---
layout: chapter
name: amending-community-land
title: "Amending community land"
chap: Chapter Six
description: Near the end of 2015, it came to the attention of the greater Amadiba community that in May of the same year, the local Municipality of Mbizana secretly and unilaterally made policy amendments that designated part of the coastal strip, including communal land, as appropriate for mining purposes.
---
During the course the ongoing legal battle, at the close of 2015, it came to the attention of the greater Amadiba community that in May of the same year, the local Municipality of Mbizana secretly and unilaterally made policy amendments that designated part of the coastal strip, including communal land, as appropriate for mining purposes.

Not only had they rezoned this land from a protected area to one suitable for mining, but had done so in a way that implied mining operations were already underway in the region.

The municipality leveraged both the Spatial Planning and Land Use Management Act and the Municipal Systems Act when they prepared the Spatial Development Framework (SDF) for the area.

> Are you aware of how your local municipality has prepared its Spatial Development Framework for your land?

From the time the community was made aware of this, for a period of one year, they were engaged in a drawn out correspondence with their local Municipality and other government bodies demanding a correction be made to the SDF. 

When the community struggled to find success through correspondence, in December 2016 the community launched a <a class="info-link" data-toggle="collapse" href="#review-application" aria-expanded="false" aria-controls="review-application"><i class="fa fa-info-circle" aria-hidden="true"></i> review application</a> in the Mthatha High Court seeking the correction of the SDF in a court case that is still currently pending.

<div class="edu-segment collapse" id="review-application">
	<p class="edu-title">What is a review application?</p>

	<p>A review application is an application to the High Court challenging a DECISION of a public body (mostly government) that affect the rights of the person applying. One challenges the decision on the grounds that it was not properly taken because, for example, the decision maker did not take all relevant information into account, the decision maker was biased, the outcome of the decision is unconstitutional, the decision is not clearly linked to the information that was before the decision maker, etc.</p>
	 
	<p>The court cannot say whether the decision was the right one or even a good one. The court only looks at HOW the decision was taken. If the decision was not taken properly, the decision maker must do everything again.</p>
	 
	<p>There are thousands of decisions taken every day that affects communities (granting of mining rights, land use decisions, decision about who should be chief etc etc) so a review is a very useful legal tool. But it can only be done in the High Court and is therefore expensive, unless one of the public interest organisations can assist.</p>

	<a class="info-link" data-toggle="collapse" href="#review-application" aria-expanded="false" aria-controls="review-application">close</a>

</div>

Matters, however, might only be made worse by a proposed law, i.e. the Traditional and Khoi-San Leadership Bill, that seeks to remove the land rights from communities living on communal land.

This proposed law works against the structure of customary law by giving authority to traditional leadership to make decisions to trade communal land on behalf of the entire community. This disrespects the consensual core of customary law in which a community engages in extensive consultation prior to decision-making.

To further aid their court case the community proceeded to file a comment on the status quo report prepared by consultants in preparation of the Municipal Environmental Management Framework in terms of the National Environmental Management Act.

## Resources

- [Customary law and the protection of community rights to resources](/resources/customary-law.pdf)